adding-behavior: adds connecting html, css, js and changing the dom l… (#12)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-3: adding-behavior/changing-the-dom.md

# Changing the DOM

## Goals

The goal for this lesson is to display one of JavaScript's strengths: accessing and changing the DOM.

> The skills of changing the DOM using vanilla JavaScript will transfer to other front-end skills, such as working with React.

Reviewer: the vanilla javascript doesn't directly transfer, but other skills we develop while doing so do
```suggestion
The skills we develop when learning how to use vanilla JavaScript to change the DOM will transfer to other front-end skills, such as working with React.
```

## Introduction

> Keira is a crab enthusiasm, and her enthusiasm for crustaceans goes as deep as the ocean. She's making a fan site for crabs. She's already made a draft website for it.
> 
> However, she's in a very strange situation-- she knows what her `index.html` file will look like when it loads... and she wants to change how it will appear _after_ it loads. Keira needs to change the content and appearance of her site _after_ it loads in the browser, _without_ changing the HTML and CSS.

Reviewer: assorted minor fixes (most important being enthusiasm → enthusiast)
```suggestion
Keira is a crab enthusiast, and her enthusiasm for crustaceans goes as deep as the ocean. She's making a fan site for crabs. She's already made a draft website for it.

However, she's in a very strange situation—she knows what her `index.html` file will look like when it loads... but she wants to change how it will appear _after_ it loads. Keira needs to change the content and appearance of her site _after_ it loads in the browser, _without_ changing the HTML and CSS.
```

How can Keira accomplish her goal? She'll use JavaScript and her knowledge of the DOM to help her!

To change elements in the DOM, we'll need to learn two things:

- How to select HTML elements in the DOM
- How to specify the changes we want

## HTML Data in `document`

To work with the DOM, we need to learn how to access the DOM. To do that, let's run an experiment:

1. With _any_ website open, open the browser Dev Tools
1. Open the console

> 1. Run the statement `document`

Reviewer: might not be clear what is meant by running that statement
```suggestion
1. Type the statement `document`, and evaluate it by hitting `⏎ Return`
```

> We should see the details of a document object print to the console.

Reviewer: since we're referring to the document just above, the definite article is more appropriate
```suggestion
We should see the details of the document object print to the console.
```

![The Crab Fan Site, and the Dev Tools console open. The Dev Tools console has output details about the document object.](../assets/adding-behavior_changing-the-dom_document.png)

The browser provides the global variable `document`. This variable represents the root node of the DOM.

The DOM represents all the HTML elements on a page. Because `document` is the root node of the DOM, we will use `document` to access and select other HTML elements.

> Whenever we want to access the DOM, we'll being with `document`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whenever we want to access the DOM, we'll start with the `document` object.
```

## Selecting Elements Using `document`

> Before we can change a specific element, we need to select that element first.

Reviewer: reflow
provide a light inline definition of selecting (getting a reference to)
```suggestion
Before we can change a specific element, we first need to get a reference to the element by selecting it.
```

```

The above line initializes a `const` variable named `fancyParagraphElement`. It's set to an HTML element that has the idea `fancy-paragraph`.

Here are a few built-in and available methods that operate off of `document`, which select HTML elements:

| Method                   | Description                                                              |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `getElementById`         | Returns the element that has the ID attribute with the specified value   |
| `getElementsByClassName` | Returns a NodeList containing all elements with the specified class name |
| `getElementsByTagName`   | Returns a NodeList containing all elements with the specified tag name   |
| `querySelector`          | Returns the first element that matches the given CSS selector            |
| `querySelectorAll`       | Returns a list containing all elements that match the given CSS selector |

When we get back a list from `getElementsByClassName` `getElementsByTagName`, or `querySelectorAll`, we'll need to access elements through indexing or loops!

## Modifying Elements

> Once we have our targeted HTML element, we can modify it!

Reviewer 2: Just suggesting a clarifying what "targeted" means

```suggestion
Once we have our targeted, i.e. selected, HTML element, we can modify it!
```

Reviewer: I'd go all the way of replacing targeted with selected. We already used the term selected previously, and I don't see a compelling reason to introduce targeted here
```suggestion
Once we have our selected HTML element, we can modify it!
```

| `classList`         | Attribute. An element's list of classes as a space-delimited string via `element.className`. Read-only. |
| `hasAttribute()`    | Method. Returns true if an element has the specified attribute, otherwise false.                        |
| `setAttribute()`    | Method. Sets or changes the specified attribute, to the specified value.                                |

### Example: Reading and Changing Text Content

Keira has [an `index.html` page that contains a heading with an `id` of `facts__heading`](https://replit.com/@adacore/Changing-the-DOM-Demo#index.html). The text of this heading is incorrect, and Keira needs to change it with JavaScript.

We can change the text content of this element like so:

```js
const appearanceHeading = document.getElementById("facts__heading");

appearanceHeading.textContent = "Qualities and Traits of a Crab";
```

Here, we selected an element by ID using `document.getElementById()`. We store this element in `appearanceHeading`.

Then, we set the `textContent` attribute to `"Qualities and Traits of a Crab"`.

> ![The Crab Fan Site with the heading "Qualities and Traits of a Crab"](../assets/adding-behavior_changing-the-dom_text-content.png)

Reviewer: It would be nice if this image were shorter vertically. The bottom third or so doesn't convey any useful information.

### Example: Changing Styles

> How do we change the appearance of an element using JavaScript? We'll mix in our CSS skills, and add a CSS class to our target element!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How do we change the appearance of an element using JavaScript? We'll mix in our CSS skills, and add a CSS class to our targeted element!
```

Reviewer: Here too, I'd go with selected 
```suggestion
How do we change the appearance of an element using JavaScript? We'll mix in our CSS skills, and add a CSS class to our selected element!
```

Keira's [`index.html` page](https://replit.com/@adacore/Changing-the-DOM-Demo#index.html) contains a very important fact in one element. This element has an `id` of `appearance__fact--important`.

Keira wants to highlight this important fact and give it a nice yellow background color, and make the text bolder.

She can create a new CSS class, `highlight`:

```css
.highlight {
  background-color: palegoldenrod;
  font-weight: bolder;
}
```

Then, she can select the important fact element and add this new class to the element:

```js
const importantFact = document.getElementById("appearance__fact--important");

importantFact.className = `${importantFact.className} highlight`;
```

`className` is an attribute, not a method.

- To read the list of classes, we use the dot-operator
- To set the list of classes, we use the assignment operator

Note that we assign `importantFact.className` to a string that interpolates the existing `importantFact.className` list! Since we want to _add_ the class `highlight`, and not _replace_ all classes in the list, we're including the current list of the element's classes.

> ![The Crab Fan Site with one important fact highlighted with a pale yellow background and bolder text](../assets/adding-behavior_changing-the-dom_appearance.png)

Reviewer: It would be nice if this image were shorter vertically. The bottom third or so doesn't convey any useful information.

## Creating New Elements

Keira's really grateful for whoever wrote this initial Crab Fan Site `index.html`, but there just isn't enough crab facts. Keira needs to add another fact to the list.

In order to add new content to our page using JavaScript, we again approach this problem by thinking about the DOM.

We'll combine these two methods for our strategy:

1. `document` has a method named `createElement`, which creates a new HTML element.
1. Every HTML element has a method named `appendChild`. This method adds a new child node to the element as the last child node.

> After Keira looks up online how to use the methods `createElement` and `appendChild`, she can write [this code](https://replit.com/@adacore/Changing-the-DOM-Demo#scripts/index.js):

Reviewer: now she's already looked these up, so we can make a bit of a modification for flow here
```suggestion
With the `createElement` and `appendChild` methods in hand, now Keira can write [this code](https://replit.com/@adacore/Changing-the-DOM-Demo#scripts/index.js):
```

```js
const newAppearanceFact = document.createElement("li");

newAppearanceFact.textContent = "covered in sand (when on a sandy beach)";

> const appearanceList = document.getElementById("appearance__list");

Reviewer: incorrect id (with this change, this matches the replit)
```suggestion
const appearanceList = document.getElementById("facts__list");
```

appearanceList.appendChild(newAppearanceFact);
```

In [this example](https://replit.com/@adacore/Changing-the-DOM-Demo#scripts/index.js), after reloading the page, we should see a new, sixth crab fact.

> ![The Crab Fan Site with a new fact added to the list, "covered in sand (when on a sandy beach)"](../assets/adding-behavior_changing-the-dom_adding-content.png)

Reviewer: adds caption
```suggestion
![The Crab Fan Site with a new fact added to the list, "covered in sand (when on a sandy beach)"](../assets/adding-behavior_changing-the-dom_adding-content.png)  
_Fig. Keira's crab fan site laying down the facts thanks to JavaScript!_
```

Reviewer: It would be nice if this image were shorter vertically. The bottom third or so doesn't convey any useful information.

### !callout-info

## Keep Researching!

- How do we delete an element from the DOM?
- How do we select all the children of one specific element?
- How do we add a new element to the _beginning_ of the child list?
- Are there alternative approaches to what we accomplished in this lesson?

> 

Reviewer: br for spacing
```suggestion

<br />

```

> These are all valid questions that deserve research and using the DOM. Follow your curiosity!

Reviewer: felt like there was a word missing
```suggestion
These are all valid questions that deserve research and experimentation using the DOM. Follow your curiosity!
```
